.TH TRIGGER-SCALERS 1 "2026-03-30" "Mu2e DAQ" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
trigger-scalers \- real-time trigger scalar monitoring GUI for the Mu2e DAQ system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B trigger-scalers
[\fB\-c\fR \fIfile\fR]
[\fB\-\-protocol\fR \fIproto\fR]
[\fB\-\-size\fR \fIsize\fR]
[\fB\-\-interval\-ms\fR \fIms\fR]
[\fB\-\-columns\fR \fIn\fR]
[\fB\-\-udp\-address\fR \fIaddr\fR]
[\fB\-\-udp\-port\fR \fIport\fR]
[\fB\-\-zmq\-endpoint\fR \fIurl\fR]
[\fB\-\-zmq\-port\fR \fIport\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B trigger-scalers
is a Qt-based GUI application that monitors trigger scalar counts for the
Mu2e experiment DAQ system at Fermilab.
It listens for 12-byte broadcast messages over UDP or ZeroMQ, each carrying
a trigger category index and an increment value.
The application accumulates per-category counts, computes rolling-average
rates in Hz, and displays them in a Nixie-tube-inspired dark panel with
configurable rate alarms.
.PP
Multiple trigger categories are organised into named
.I banks
as defined in the YAML configuration file.
Each trigger widget shows its cumulative count, current rate, and an alarm
indicator dot that changes colour when the rate falls outside configured
thresholds.
.PP
The display is fully configurable via a YAML file; most settings can also be
overridden on the command line without editing the file.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config " " \fIfile\fR
Path to the YAML configuration file.
Default: \fBscalars.yaml\fR in the current directory.
.TP
.B \-\-protocol " " \fIproto\fR
Override the transport protocol from the config file.
Accepted values: \fBudp\fR, \fBzeromq\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-size " " \fIsize\fR
Override the display size, which controls the count digit font size.
Accepted values: \fBsmall\fR, \fBmedium\fR, \fBlarge\fR, \fBhuge\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-interval\-ms " " \fIms\fR
Override the rate update interval in milliseconds.
The GUI recomputes and displays rates at this frequency.
.TP
.B \-\-columns " " \fIn\fR
Override the number of scalar widgets per row within each bank.
.TP
.B \-\-udp\-address " " \fIaddr\fR
Override the UDP bind address (e.g.\& \fB0.0.0.0\fR to listen on all interfaces).
Only used when the protocol is \fBudp\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-udp\-port " " \fIport\fR
Override the UDP bind port.
Only used when the protocol is \fBudp\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-zmq\-endpoint " " \fIurl\fR
Override the full ZeroMQ endpoint URL (e.g.\& \fBtcp://daq\-host:5556\fR).
Only used when the protocol is \fBzeromq\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-zmq\-port " " \fIport\fR
Replace only the port number in the configured ZeroMQ endpoint.
Can be combined with \fB\-\-zmq\-endpoint\fR.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display a brief usage summary and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Display the application version and exit.
.SH CONFIGURATION FILE
The configuration file is YAML with three top-level sections:
.SS display
.TP
.B size
Counter digit font size: \fBsmall\fR | \fBmedium\fR | \fBlarge\fR | \fBhuge\fR.
.TP
.B update_interval_ms
Rate refresh interval in milliseconds (default 1000).
.TP
.B columns
Scalar widgets per row (default 4).
.TP
.B color_scheme
Built-in colour scheme name.
One of: \fBAmber\fR, \fBGreen Phosphor\fR, \fBBlue\fR, \fBRed\fR, \fBLight\fR.
.SS transport
.TP
.B protocol
\fBudp\fR or \fBzeromq\fR.
.TP
.B udp.bind_address
Interface address to listen on (e.g.\& \fB0.0.0.0\fR).
.TP
.B udp.port
UDP port number.
.TP
.B zeromq.endpoint
ZeroMQ connection string (e.g.\& \fBtcp://localhost:5556\fR).
.TP
.B zeromq.socket_type
\fBsub\fR for PUB/SUB pattern; \fBpull\fR for PUSH/PULL pattern.
.SS banks
A YAML sequence of bank objects.
Each bank has a \fBname\fR and a \fBtriggers\fR sequence.
Each trigger has:
.TP
.B id
Integer category index matching the \fBcategory\fR field of incoming messages.
.TP
.B name
Display label for the trigger.
.TP
.B target_rate
Expected rate in Hz (informational only).
.TP
.B visible
Boolean; \fBfalse\fR hides the widget but still accumulates counts.
.TP
.B alarm.enabled
Boolean; enables rate threshold monitoring.
.TP
.B alarm.min_rate
Lower rate threshold in Hz.
A rate below this turns the alarm dot red.
Set to \fB\-1\fR to disable.
.TP
.B alarm.max_rate
Upper rate threshold in Hz.
A rate above this turns the alarm dot yellow.
Set to \fB\-1\fR to disable.
.SH WIRE PROTOCOL
Each incoming message is a 12-byte little-endian binary struct:
.PP
.TS
l l l l.
Offset	Type	Field	Meaning
0	uint32_t	category	Trigger category index (0-based)
4	uint64_t	value	Increment to add to the running count
.TE
.PP
The receiver adds each incoming \fBvalue\fR to its local running total for the
given \fBcategory\fR.
The application never sends replies.
.SH GUI
.SS Alarm indicator colours
.TP
Grey
Alarm disabled.
.TP
Green
Rate is within [min_rate, max_rate].
.TP
Red
Rate is below min_rate.
.TP
Yellow
Rate is above max_rate.
.SS Colour schemes
Five built-in schemes are available via the \fBView \(-> Color Scheme\fR menu:
\fBAmber\fR (default), \fBGreen Phosphor\fR, \fBBlue\fR, \fBRed\fR, \fBLight\fR.
The active scheme is saved when using \fBFile \(-> Save Config\fR.
.SS Keyboard shortcuts
.TP
.B Ctrl+S
Save current configuration to a YAML file.
.TP
.B Ctrl+C
Copy all scaler names, counts, and rates to the clipboard as CSV.
.TP
.B Ctrl+Q
Quit.
.SS Context menu
Right-clicking a scalar widget provides options to enable/disable that
specific scaler and to reset its count to zero.
.SH CLIPBOARD FORMAT
The clipboard CSV begins with a timestamp line followed by one row per scaler:
.PP
.nf
2026-03-30 09:15:42
Mu2e Spill,12345,0.587
Booster Spill,67890,14.923
.fi
.PP
Fields: \fIname\fR, \fIcount\fR, \fIrate_hz\fR.
Names containing commas or double-quotes are quoted per RFC 4180.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I config/scalars.yaml
Default configuration file shipped with the application.
.SH EXAMPLES
Start with the default config:
.PP
.nf
trigger-scalers -c config/scalars.yaml
.fi
.PP
Override the protocol and port from the command line:
.PP
.nf
trigger-scalers -c config/scalars.yaml --protocol zeromq --zmq-port 5557
.fi
.PP
Use a large font and four-column layout:
.PP
.nf
trigger-scalers -c config/scalars.yaml --size large --columns 4
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR udp-sender (1),
.BR zmq-sender (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Mu2e DAQ Group, Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory.
