.TH UDP-SENDER 1 "2026-03-30" "Mu2e DAQ" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
udp-sender \- simulated UDP trigger broadcast sender for trigger-scalers testing
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B udp-sender
[\fB\-H\fR \fIaddr\fR]
[\fB\-p\fR \fIport\fR]
[\fB\-i\fR \fIms\fR]
[\fB\-s\fR \fIfactor\fR]
[\fB\-\-single\fR \fIid\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B udp-sender
is a Qt-based test tool that simulates the Mu2e DAQ trigger broadcast without
requiring real DAQ hardware.
It generates Poisson-distributed trigger events at the rates defined in
.IR tools/SimulatedTriggers.h ,
packages them as 12-byte
.I TriggerMessage
structs, and sends them as UDP datagrams to the configured destination.
.PP
Each send interval the tool iterates over every configured trigger category.
If a category fires (determined by a Poisson sample), a message is sent with
that category's ID and the number of firings as the increment value.
Categories that do not fire in a given interval produce no message.
.PP
A status line is printed to standard output every second:
.PP
.nf
[  1.0s] pkts=42 | 0:1 1:14 2:10 3:11 4:0 5:1 ...
.fi
.PP
Each entry shows \fIcategory_id\fR:\fIcumulative_count\fR.
.PP
This tool is intended for use with
.BR trigger-scalers (1)
configured to use the \fBudp\fR protocol.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-H ", " \-\-host " " \fIaddr\fR
Destination IP address.
Default: \fB127.0.0.1\fR (loopback).
Use \fB255.255.255.255\fR to broadcast to all hosts on the local subnet
(requires the socket to be bound; this is handled automatically).
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-port " " \fIport\fR
Destination UDP port number.
Default: \fB5555\fR.
Must match \fBtransport.udp.port\fR in the receiver's configuration.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-interval\-ms " " \fIms\fR
Send interval in milliseconds.
The tool samples all trigger categories and sends any non-zero increments
once per interval.
Default: \fB100\fR.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-rate\-scale " " \fIfactor\fR
Multiply all simulated trigger rates by this factor before Poisson sampling.
Values greater than 1 produce higher rates; values between 0 and 1 produce
lower rates.
Default: \fB1.0\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-single " " \fIid\fR
Send a single message with the given category ID and a value of 1, then exit.
The \fIid\fR may be specified in decimal (e.g.\& \fB14\fR) or hexadecimal with
the \fB0x\fR prefix (e.g.\& \fB0x00E\fR).
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display usage information and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Display the version and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
Send to the local loopback at 100 ms intervals (default behaviour):
.PP
.nf
udp-sender
.fi
.PP
Broadcast to the local subnet on port 5555:
.PP
.nf
udp-sender --host 255.255.255.255 --port 5555
.fi
.PP
Run at 10 times the normal rates with a 50 ms interval:
.PP
.nf
udp-sender --rate-scale 10 --interval-ms 50
.fi
.PP
Send a single message for trigger category 0x00E and exit:
.PP
.nf
udp-sender --single 0x00E
.fi
.PP
Send a single message for trigger category 3 to a remote host:
.PP
.nf
udp-sender --host 192.168.1.100 --single 3
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR trigger-scalers (1),
.BR zmq-sender (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Mu2e DAQ Group, Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory.
