.TH ZMQ-SENDER 1 "2026-03-30" "Mu2e DAQ" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
zmq-sender \- simulated ZeroMQ trigger sender for trigger-scalers testing
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zmq-sender
[\fB\-\-endpoint\fR \fIurl\fR]
[\fB\-\-socket\-type\fR \fItype\fR]
[\fB\-\-interval\-ms\fR \fIms\fR]
[\fB\-\-rate\-scale\fR \fIfactor\fR]
[\fB\-\-single\fR \fIid\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B zmq-sender
is a plain C++ (no Qt) test tool that simulates the Mu2e DAQ trigger
broadcast over ZeroMQ without requiring real DAQ hardware.
It generates Poisson-distributed trigger events at the rates defined in
.IR tools/SimulatedTriggers.h ,
packages them as 12-byte
.I TriggerMessage
structs, and publishes them via a ZeroMQ PUB or PUSH socket.
.PP
The sender
.I binds
its socket to the configured endpoint.
The
.BR trigger-scalers (1)
receiver
.I connects
to that endpoint.
This is the standard ZeroMQ server/client topology for PUB/SUB and PUSH/PULL.
.PP
Each send interval the tool iterates over every configured trigger category.
If a category fires (determined by a Poisson sample), a message is sent with
that category's ID and the number of firings as the increment value.
Categories that do not fire in a given interval produce no message.
Messages are sent with the \fBDONTWAIT\fR flag; if no subscriber is connected
the message is silently discarded by ZeroMQ.
.PP
A brief delay of 200 ms is observed at startup before the first messages are
sent, giving subscribers time to connect before transmissions begin.
.PP
A status line is printed to standard output every second:
.PP
.nf
[  1.0s] pkts=42 | 0:1 1:14 2:10 3:11 4:0 5:1 ...
.fi
.PP
Each entry shows \fIcategory_id\fR:\fIcumulative_count\fR.
.PP
This tool is only available when the project is built with
.BR \-DWITH_ZEROMQ=ON .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-endpoint " " \fIurl\fR
ZeroMQ endpoint to bind.
Default: \fBtcp://0.0.0.0:5556\fR.
The receiver's \fBtransport.zeromq.endpoint\fR must point to this host and port.
.TP
.B \-\-socket\-type " " \fItype\fR
ZeroMQ socket type.
Accepted values:
.RS
.TP
.B pub
PUB socket (PUB/SUB pattern).
The receiver must be configured with \fBsocket_type: sub\fR.
This is the default.
.TP
.B push
PUSH socket (PUSH/PULL pipeline).
The receiver must be configured with \fBsocket_type: pull\fR.
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-interval\-ms " " \fIms\fR
Send interval in milliseconds.
Default: \fB100\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-rate\-scale " " \fIfactor\fR
Multiply all simulated trigger rates by this factor before Poisson sampling.
Default: \fB1.0\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-single " " \fIid\fR
Send a single message with the given category ID and a value of 1, then exit.
A 200 ms connection delay is applied before sending to allow subscribers to
connect.
The \fIid\fR may be specified in decimal (e.g.\& \fB14\fR) or hexadecimal with
the \fB0x\fR prefix (e.g.\& \fB0x00E\fR).
.TP
.B \-\-help
Display usage information and exit.
.SH NOTES
When using the PUB/SUB pattern, ZeroMQ discards messages for categories that
have no connected subscribers at the time of sending.
Once
.BR trigger-scalers (1)
connects and subscribes, all subsequent messages are delivered normally.
There is no message replay for missed events; the receiver's running totals
simply start accumulating from the point of connection.
.SH EXAMPLES
Publish on all interfaces at port 5556 using PUB/SUB (default):
.PP
.nf
zmq-sender
.fi
.PP
Use PUSH/PULL instead:
.PP
.nf
zmq-sender --socket-type push --endpoint tcp://0.0.0.0:5556
.fi
.PP
Run at five times normal rates with a 200 ms send interval:
.PP
.nf
zmq-sender --rate-scale 5 --interval-ms 200
.fi
.PP
Send a single message for trigger category 14 and exit:
.PP
.nf
zmq-sender --single 14
.fi
.PP
Send a single message for trigger category 0x00E using hex notation:
.PP
.nf
zmq-sender --single 0x00E
.fi
.PP
Corresponding receiver configuration for the above:
.PP
.nf
transport:
  protocol: zeromq
  zeromq:
    endpoint: "tcp://127.0.0.1:5556"
    socket_type: sub
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR trigger-scalers (1),
.BR udp-sender (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Mu2e DAQ Group, Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory.
